\section{Introduction}
This is the Software Requirements Specification (SRS) for \progname{}, a 
Computational Model of Emotion (CME) for Non-Player Characters (NPCs) to 
enhance their believability, with the goal of improving long-term player 
engagement. \progname{} is for \textit{emotion generation}, accepting 
user-defined information from a game environment to determines what emotion and 
intensity a NPC is ``experiencing''. How the emotion is expressed and what 
other effects it could have on game entities is left for game 
designers/developers to decide.

\progname{} aims to provide a feasible and easy-to-use method for game 
designers/developers to include emotion in their NPCs, they perceive to be 
challenging with the current tools and 
restrictions~\citep{broekens2016emotional}. \progname{} should be modular and 
portable such that game designers/developers can use it in their regular 
development environment, and should not require knowledge of affective science, 
psychology, and/or emotion theories.

A \textit{believable character} ``...allows the audience to suspend their 
disbelief and...provides a convincing portrayal of the personality they expect
or come to expect [from the character]''~\cite[p.~1]{loyall1997believable}. 
Believability is not limited to ``smart'' or ``normal'' characters because it
depends on the situational context and the character's
personality~\citep{lisetti2015and, loyall1997believable, reilly1996believable}.
In short: an NPC must behave reasonably within the context of the game world.
Generally, NPCs are believable when they~\citep{lankoski2007gameplay,
    loyall1997believable, warpefelt2013analyzing}:
\begin{itemize}
    \item Appear to be self-motivated,
    
    \item Are aware of what is happening around them, and
    
    \item React in ways appropriate for their surrounding context while
    adhering to their personality.
\end{itemize}

\textit{Emotion}, transient responses to changes in the 
environment~\citep{lazarus1991emotion}, is one element of believable character 
design~\citep{de2015beyond, emmerich2018m, gard2000building, 
lankoski2007gameplay, lisetti2015and, loyall1997believable, paiva2005learning, 
warpefelt2013analyzing}. It is an established aspect of believability in 
animation~\citep{thomas1981illusion}, and game designers have acknowledged its 
importance in NPC design~\citep{hudlicka2009foundations, yannakakis2015emotion}.

Characters with emotion address the core features of believability because they 
convey a character's goals and desires (\textit{self-motivated}) by showing 
their \textit{awareness} of, \textit{responsiveness} to, and care 
(\textit{personality}-driven) for their surroundings~\citep{bates1994, 
broekens2021emotion, reilly1996believable}. It follows that one way to improve 
an NPC's believability is to have them react emotionally to their 
surroundings~\citep{togelius2013assessing, yannakakis2015emotion}.

The template presenting this SRS's information is based on 
\citet{SmithAndLai2005} and \citet{SmithEtAl2007}. The introductory sections 
describe the project stakeholders (Section~\ref{sec:doc_stakeholder}), purpose 
of this document (Section~\ref{sec:doc_purpose}), what background and knowledge 
a reader must have to understand this document (Section~\ref{sec:doc_reader}), 
the requirement scope (Section~\ref{sec:doc_reqscope}), and the organization of 
document sections (Section~\ref{sec:doc_org}).

\input{Introduction/stakeholders}

\input{Introduction/purposeofdoc}

\input{Introduction/intendedreader}

\input{Introduction/reqscope}

\input{Introduction/docorg}